There's a feeling.
[narrator]
The pulse of eternal knowledge.
When you sense the oneness...
you are with us.
We brought life to Earth.
You can't see us,
but we flourish
all around you.
Everywhere.
In everything.
And even inside you,
whether you believe in us
or not.
From your first breath
to your last,
and in the light,
in darkness
we are the oldest
and youngest.
We are the largest
and smallest.
of a billion years.
We are the wisdom
We are creation.
We are resurrection,
and regeneration.
condemnation,
We are mushrooms.
Mushrooms are very clandestine
and very much the trickster.
[Paul Stamets]
from you all the time.
So, they're hiding
We're in Agarikon
territory now.
living snags up here.
There're some big
It's always interesting
to be in the old growth forest,
and exhilarating
but not always rewarding
in accomplishing our mission
to find a new Agarikon strain,
but nevertheless,
it beats being
in the office.
Fungi are the grand molecular
decomposers of nature.
Now, what does that mean?
Well,
they break down wood,
and here I'm laying
in the forest.
I haven't peeked yet,
but here's a piece of wood
laying down on the ground.
on the ground and I died,
If I was laying down
fungi would leap up
to recycle me.
Well, that's the way
of nature.
Mushrooms represent rebirth,
rejuvenation, regeneration.
Fungi generate soil
that gives life.
The task that we face today
the language of nature.
is to understand
My mission is to discover
the language of nature
of the fungal networks
with the ecosystem,
that communicate
nature is intelligent.
and I believe
to communicate with nature
The fact that we lack
the language skills
does not impugn the concept
that nature's intelligent.
It speaks to our inadequacy
for communication.
If we don't get our act together
and come in commonality
and understanding
that sustain us today,
with the organisms
not only will we destroy
those organisms,
destroy ourselves.
but we will
It's not like a vegetable,
Mushroom.
but it's somewhere in between.
and it's not like a animal,
own kingdom altogether.
The fungus is its
1.5 million species.
There's over
That's six times more
than plants.
Of all those species
of fungi,
produce mushrooms,
about 20,000
in an incredible diversity
and mushrooms come
and colors and lifestyles.
of shapes and sizes
bioluminescent mushrooms.
There are even
A lot of people are afraid
of mushrooms.
and fungi-- you know, mold--
People associate mushrooms
with death and decay,
which makes sense.
there's a lot of fear
You know,
because of fungi's role
in the cycle of life.
They decompose dead
and dying organisms
and move all those nutrients
back into the cycle.
at the very end of stuff,
They kind of are
at the beginning.
but they're also
[Michael Pollan] Once you start
working with mushrooms,
you get drawn in.
A really important difference
between plants and fungi
is that plants have evolved
to catch your eye.
When a tomato gets red,
"Hey, I'm ready. Come get me."
it is saying,
The mushrooms
don't give a shit.
They're doing their own thing,
and a lot of them are hiding.
Every time you pick up
a mushroom,
with the omnivore's dilemma.
you are faced
Do I know enough
to eat this?
Should I eat this?
Will this kill me?
of the reasons why
And that's one
about mushrooms, because yeah,
people are freaked out
that can kill you.
there are ones
There are some that'll take out
your liver or your kidneys,
there's berries in the woods
but to be honest with you,
that can kill you too.
of knowing your mushrooms.
So, it's really a matter
There's a huge subculture
of mycophiles,
of people who are fascinated
with mushrooms.
eat mushrooms together,
They hunt mushrooms
together, and they
of bloated pleasure seekers
and they're sort
with a scientific bent.
really my kind of crowd.
You know,
This is a tricholoma.
[Gary Lincoff]
Grifola frondosa.
[Bone]
Cortinarius ludogriseus.
[Lincoff] This is
Agaricus bisporus.
[Bone]
That's a Cladonia lichen.
[Bone] So I started attending
these festivals and forays
and learning more and more.
It changed the way
I saw everything.
were the window by which
Mushrooms actually
I came to understand nature
in a deeper way.
If we didn't have fungi,
[Stamets]
we would get this buildup
would choke the Earth.
of plant matter that
They really are the key.
They break down plant life
and make it usable
and for animal life.
for new plant life
[Bone] They are the digestive
tracts of the forest.
One of the lifestyles of fungi
is as decomposers,
called saprobes or rotters,
if you want.
The yeasts and molds used
in making beer and wine
and cheese
are all saprobes.
a penicillin mold
That's actually
and Roquefort.
in Gorgonzola
is fungi-fermented corn.
Bourbon
to break things down
But this ability
is a talent,
if you will,
that can be harnessed
of our problems like pollution.
to help us deal with some
These rotters,
anything that's natural.
they can break down
they've evolved to do.
That's what
that's hydrocarbon-based,
Anything
so that includes stuff
like oil spills,
pollutant problems.
of the truth of it.
That's kind
[Stamets] I was a part
of this experiment.
There were four piles saturated
with diesel
and other petroleum waste.
One was a control pile,
one pile was treated
with enzymes,
one pile treated
with a bacteria,
and our pile, we inoculated
with mushroom spores.
The fungi absorbs the oil,
so the fungi is producing
enzymes for oxidases
carbon-hydrogen bonds.
that break
These are the same bonds that
hold hydrocarbons together.
So the fungi becomes
saturated with oil.
we returned six weeks later,
all the tarps were removed.
And then when
were dead, dark and stinky.
We came back to our pile.
All the other piles
It was covered with hundreds
of pounds of oyster mushrooms.
are very happy mushrooms.
Some of these mushrooms
They were very large,
by showing how much nutrition
that they could obtain.
But something else happened,
which was an epiphany
in my life.
They sporulated.
The spores attract insects.
bringing in seeds,
Birds then came,
and our pile became
an oasis of life.
the fruiting bodies of fungi.
[Bone] Mushrooms are
is like the apple.
So the mushroom
The bulk of the organism
is growing underground
of these long threads
and it's composed
and these threads grow
one cell at a time
and then they branch
and rebranch,
direction they can,
growing in every
even three-dimensionally.
And that mass of threads
is called a mycelium.
When a stick falls
onto the ground...
you pull it up...
and there's mycelium.
It is virtually everywhere.
A mycelium has more networks
has neural pathways,
than our brain
in much the same way,
and works
with electrolytes,
electrical pulses.
common species on Earth.
They're the most
They're everywhere.
Just to give you an idea
are in the forest,
of how much fungi
what you're walking through
is about 300 miles of fungi
under every footstep
that you take.
all over the world.
And that's
these massive links.
And they form
growing through the forest.
It's like a big web just
Mycelium that can grow out
even just this big
literally trillions,
can have trillions,
of end branchings.
about the computer internet.
Almost everyone knows
the same network design.
The mycelium shares
using the mycelium as pathways.
Trees are communicating,
[Pollan]
one tree to another.
They're connecting
They're using the mycelium too
to feed one another.
In other words, one tree
can swap nutrients with
another tree,
as the passageway.
using mycelium
think of kin recognition
[Simard] So we often
as an animal behavior.
we love our babies.
Humans, you know,
We know it's our baby,
and we're going to look
after that baby.
that plants could do that,
Well, we never thought
but we're finding
in our research
that plants can recognize
their own kin.
So these mother trees
recognize their kin
mycorrhizal networks.
through their
and the baby seedlings
are sending signals,
The mother tree
talking to each other.
connected together
When they're
and carbon is moving
between plants,
the trees are supporting
the weaker ones.
and that she's under danger,
that there's pests around,
If she knows
her competitive environment
towards her own babies,
she will increase
so that they regenerate
further away.
It's a magical thing.
And this could not happen
without the fungi.
super-idealist tree hugger.
[Stamets] I'm not this
I do hug trees occasionally.
I do confess to that,
but I was a logger.
I cut the woods.
Damn, we got a two-for-one
on that one.
and we're going to let them rot,
Cutting down these trees
but we're letting them rot
with a purpose.
with shiitake mushrooms,
We're letting them rot
which are delicious
and medicinal
Yes!
September of '74,
Paul was working as a logger
in Darrington.
I went up to visit him
one weekend,
and we were out walking
in the woods,
all these mushrooms, you know?
and I started showing him
He says, "What are those?"
looking at mushrooms,"
I said, "You're
...for the first time.
there's this purple mushroom.
We came around a corner and
I'd never seen one
like that before.
this huge epiphany,
It was just like
like... Whoo-whoo!
And that's where it began.
You know?
He just never stopped.
These are old red belted
polypores.
It's got a furry stem.
Elegant polyporus.
shrimp russula mushroom,
This is a delicious
edible and choice,
in the old growth forest.
and it grows here
It's rare in science you have
such powerful amateurs.
[Pollan]
The meaning of the word
"amateur" is a lover,
and he loves his mushrooms.
amateurs can do credible,
And he's proven that
important research.
to be the case.
And that used
The 19th century obviously,
great amateur naturalists,
you know, was full of
Darwin being one of them.
[Harman] He's handed over to
this universal consciousness.
That's where genius
comes from.
Every magnificent thing
that humans have ever achieved
comes from that place.
I grew up in a small town
called Columbiana, Ohio.
[P. Stamets]
Very conservative,
very religious.
And my brother John
went to Yale,
and my brother Bill
went to Cornell.
an academic family.
So we were
a severe stuttering habit
But I had
that greatly interfered with
my ability to express myself.
I went through six years
of speech therapy.
I could not speak
a single sentence
without stuttering
profusely,
and nothing in speech therapy
could help me.
people in their eyes.
I couldn't look at
I stared at the ground.
So all my life,
I'd stare at the ground.
Anybody came up to me,
I found fossils
and mushrooms.
[wind blowing]
We are all of the stars.
[narrator]
My kingdom was born
from the heavens
four and a half billion
years ago.
We are the pioneers.
to create the fertile soil,
We climbed out of the sea
and set the stage
for all of life.
[P. Stamets] In South Africa,
in the sediments of lava,
fungus-like organisms,
they have found
mycelium fossils in the lava
2.4 billion years old.
multicellular organism on Earth.
This is the oldest record of a
the sediments of Brazil.
fossil was found in
This year another
It's 113 million years old
and it's a perfectly
shaped mushroom.
about 650 million years ago.
We divided from fungi
One branch led to fungi.
The other branch led
to animals.
of encirculating our nutrients
in sort of a sac, the stomach.
We chose a path
remained underground,
The mycelium
externally digesting
its nutrients.
Biodiversity surged...
cataclysmic extinction events,
until we had these great
impacted the Earth, bam!
and when the asteroids
Enormous amounts of debris was
jettisoned in the atmosphere.
Sunlight was cut off.
Plants die, animals die...
inherited the Earth.
and fungi
From these extinction events,
there's one lesson.
paired with fungi survived.
Those organisms that
We are more closely
related to fungi
any other kingdom.
than we are to
we are descendants of mycelium.
What this means is that
the mother of us all.
Mycelium is
[Pollan] Living creatures
like fungi are intelligent
in the sense that they respond
to their environment,
and they defend themselves.
they seek out food,
and that's intelligence.
They solve problems,
theoretically live forever
[Bone] A mycelium can
has food to grow into,
as long as it
and largest organism on Earth
which is why the oldest
is a fungus.
of a mountain in Oregon.
It lives on top
It's like thousands
of acres,
and it's thousands
of years old.
The mushroom is the organ
of sexual reproduction
of the fungus.
for the spore
Fungi don't have seeds.
They have spores.
The spores are extremely tiny,
gene-carrying systems.
little lightweight
When they land on something
they can eat,
they break down the food
that they're on,
and then reabsorb
the nutrients
because you need
to move on
and find another place
where there's food.
The mushroom releases zillions
of spores into the atmosphere.
There's so many spore.
you take one breath...
I mean,
you just breathed in
ten fungal spore.
We've evolved with them.
So they are everywhere.
When you see what mushrooms do,
[Harman]
in the most wonderful way.
it's kind of spooky
I mean, they correct
everything on Earth.
They support life,
they convert life,
they carry life.
They're remarkable beings.
If humans become extinct...
that will take over the Earth?
what's the next species
Maybe mycelium already are
the dominant species,
not just because they're the
most common species on Earth.
They're everywhere.
There's seven billion of us,
I mean, you look at humans.
creature wandering around,
but we're just one little
incredibly vulnerable,
and don't survive easily
if we're assaulted.
has started to make landfall
[reporter] Hurricane Harvey
here on the Texas coast.
More than 30,000 people
are without power,
expected to get worse.
and things are only
[reporter 2] Puerto Rico
has had the worst storm
in about a century,
and it's struggling
to understand the new normal
without basic services.
of months ahead
[man] Climate change is one
of the biggest threats
to our present world,
to the future of our planet.
biggest greenhouse gas.
[Simard] CO2 is our
As plants photosynthesize,
they literally inhale CO2
while exhaling oxygen.
CO2 is what plants
photosynthesize,
and they take that carbon,
and they put it in
different places.
They put it in their leaves,
in their trunks,
we're finding, below ground.
but they put 70% of it,
And the root systems trade
that carbon for nutrients.
The carbon ends up in
the fungal cell walls,
where it's stored.
microbial community
This fuels the
and all the other parts
of the food web,
like the mites and nematodes,
cycling nutrients
and they start
eating process.
through that
So the fungi are
really important
in stabilizing
carbon in soils.
Once the carbon is stable,
it can stay there stored
for thousands of years.
We know, for example,
that carbon can move
from plant to plant,
carbon in that system.
the distribution of
and it evens out
They're working really hard.
If we maintain the plant,
the forest, and the natural
fungal community,
we've got a natural engine
carbon below ground.
that's just storing
So it's essential.
it's there for us, right?
You know,
in front of us.
It's right
We do more than make mushrooms.
[narrator]
We have the ability to
just breakdown matter.
do so much more than
Like the fruit
of our labor,
most of you have only scratched
the surface of our usefulness.
We are the changers.
[P. Stamets] I was 14 or 15
years of age, I believe,
when my brother John
gave me a book...
called Altered States
of Consciousness.
And within that book,
Andy Weil was referenced
on expanded consciousness,
and I got really excited.
I was going to charismatic
Christian revival meetings
and seeing people
being saved,
but it kind of was cool
from my perspective
altered state of consciousness.
that they're achieving this
So I thought that was part
of all the same idea here.
I really owe credit
to Andrew Weil.
[Andrew Weil] I think he
read one of my early books
about mushroom hunting
in which I wrote
and psychedelic mushrooms
to medicinal mushrooms as well.
and made some reference
a turning point.
It was like
I certainly was awakened.
You know,
about expanding consciousness.
Other people were thinking
to my friend Ryan Snyder.
And so I gave this book
So Ryan took it home
and a few days later,
"Ryan, where's my book?"
I said,
his dad had burned it.
And he told me
I said, "Burned my book?"
to me or calling my parents,
Rather than giving it back
he actually took the initiative
to burn this book.
I owe Ryan Snyder's father
a deep debt of gratitude
because that single act
galvanized my interest
saying, "If this is so powerful
to cause a person to do
such a bizarre act,
what this subject's all about."
then I should examine
[Charles Grob] Human existence
on this Earth goes back
an extraordinarily long
period of time,
no identifiable information.
most of which we have
It's entirely plausible,
people all around the world
given that the indigenous
all the plant life,
know intimately
and will know the different
combinations of plant life
prehistoric ancestors,
that our
they had come across the plants
that do alter consciousness.
In about two million years,
[Dennis McKenna]
the human cortex
tripled in size,
over a ridiculously short span
and the brain exploded
of evolutionary time.
Two million years is nothing
when it comes to evolution.
What triggered that?
In the late 1970s,
[P. Stamets]
and his brother Dennis McKenna
Terrence McKenna
were the first that proposed
the Stoned Ape hypothesis.
that 22 primates--
It is known now
23, including us--
consume mushrooms.
And the idea is our ancestors,
they came out of the trees
and went across the savannah,
would be tracking animals
that were pooping.
Well, in the subtropics,
coming out of those cow patties
the most common mushroom
a potent magic mushroom.
is Psilocybe cubensis,
One thing that mushrooms
[McKenna]
and other psychedelics
do reliably
is they induce
a synesthesia.
Synesthesia is the perception
of one sensory modality
in another,
hearing colors, for example,
or seeing music.
You have these profound
experiences
and you have to put yourself
in their place
and imagine what the impact
of such an experience
on an early hominid.
must have been
These magic mushrooms open up
information you receive.
the floodgates of
Basically, you can think of it
as a contact fluid
within the brain-- Wow!
between the synapses
What a competitive
advantage,
especially if you're working
with a geometry of weapons,
together something
or having to put
that will give you a better
chance of survival.
The fact that this happened
not once, not twice,
upon millions of times
but millions
over millions of years
is a very plausible
explanation
for the tripling of the brain
two million years ago.
[McKenna] It's not so simple
to say that they ate
psilocybin mushrooms
and suddenly the brain mutated.
complex than that,
I think it's more
but I think it was a factor.
It was like a software
to program this neurologically
modern hardware to think,
to have cognition,
to have language
is essentially synesthesia.
because language
is just association
Language
meaningless sound
with apparently
with the complex of meaning.
except that it's associated
A great deal of the brain's
real estate, you might say,
is devoted to the generation
and/or the comprehension
of language.
are not found in our ancestors.
Those neural structures
to have so much physiology
That's a human trait
and understanding language,
devoted to generating
and that's a reflection
of evolutionary advance
that made us
what we are.
[P. Stamets] I couldn't
get these mushrooms for
the longest time.
When I was in Ohio,
a bag of magic mushrooms,
I actually purchased
but I had no guide.
I had no recommendations
for how much to consume.
So I had a bag about this big,
so I thought,
"Well, that's probably
one dose."
So I consumed the bag!
Now, for those of you
who don't know,
this is like ten times more
than you probably need
to consume.
It was a warm summer day,
and there was a beautiful
big, big tree,
an oak tree,
and then I noticed
the black clouds
on the horizon,
and I realized there
was a storm coming.
And I thought, "This is great.
There's great visual.
The storm coming."
"Well I'm going to climb
to the top of the tree."
And I thought,
to feel the effects.
So I'm starting
where the air becomes a liquid,
I'm getting waves
and...
distortion field,
you'd have this
the visual landscape.
go through
I've never seen that before,
and go, "Oh wow, this is what
they were talking about."
And I see the boiling clouds
are coming closer,
but they're looking angry now.
lightning strikes would go...
And then the
[imitating lightning strikes]
geometrical fractals
and then all these
of the lightning strikes.
would emanate out
And pretty soon,
I have these overlying mosaics
of mathematical patterns
and geometric figures
of multiple colors
in this field of vision
that are swimming
were flying through.
that these waves
I've never in my life seen
anything like that before.
and the rains would come,
Wind's increasing
and I became extremely scared.
I'm on the top of a hill,
And then also I realize
I got a lightning storm
in the tallest tree.
Not the best place to be
when you're going to choose
a spiritual experience.
And so I held onto the tree
for dear life,
was my pillar,
and that tree
back into the core
of the Earth.
And I felt secure as long
as I held onto the tree.
Lightning strikes all around.
Thunderclaps.
the lightning strike
One second between
and a thunderclap.
You knew it was coming
closer and closer.
that I wouldn't survive,
I was terrified
"terror-rific" experience,
And through this
terrifying and terrific
at the same time,
I'm up in this tree
and I'm saying,
"Well, what should I focus on?"
I said, "Well, Stamets,
you're not stupid.
But you stutter all the time."
And so I thought I need
to stop stuttering.
And so I said to myself,
"Stop stuttering.
Stop stuttering now."
A little inner voice
in my head.
Stop stuttering now."
"You hear me?
I started saying that.
"Stop stuttering now.
Stop stuttering now."
Hundreds, hundreds, hundreds,
thousands of times.
After the storm had passed,
the tree drenched,
I came down from
soaked to the bone,
in love with life,
you know,
in love with that tree.
with nature,
That tree was so important
to me.
And I went home,
and I went to bed.
I didn't see anybody.
And the next morning
I woke up,
and there was a really
attractive lady
that I liked a lot,
but I could never stare
at her in the eyes,
because I was afraid to stutter
and embarrass myself.
have social contact,
So better to avoid
social contact than
really attracted to her.
even though I was
And she liked me,
what to do with it,
but I didn't know
with that tension.
And so she was walking past me,
and she looked at me,
"Good morning, Paul."
and she said,
And for the first time
I looked her straight
in the eye
"Good morning. How are you?"
and I said,
And I stopped stuttering
in one session.
[Skrillex playing on radio ]
my employees are listening to.
This is the newest thing
My employees are my best
source of new music.
in the laboratories.
We love loud music
for the mushrooms
to be synchronized.
It causes everyone
communication in laboratories.
We have a lot of nonverbal
You're not allowed to talk.
Your mouth spreads bacteria.
to minimize talking.
So we try
by gestures and knowing.
So a lot of it is done
So, why not have it
with loud music?
My dad was a businessman.
I'd never become one,
I swore
but I wanted to be
independent,
so I created a little
mail-order business
like interest in mushrooms.
in order to supply myself
and other people who had
When we started the business,
difficult back then,
it was extremely
and we didn't have
the resources.
little advertisements
We were putting
in Organic Gardening magazine
three television stations.
back when there was only
I invented this business
so I could buy equipment
for my laboratory wholesale.
nearly a hundred employees
Amazing to me, we have
of media outlets.
and thousands
were so powerful to me
These mushrooms
I wanted to study them.
that I realized that
This mushroom that's known as
reishi, or lingzhi,
of immortality.
the mushroom
And it's one of the most amazing
and interesting mushrooms
that we've ever grown.
This mushroom helps the immunity
of not only people, but bees.
Up this hill here,
we have a quarter section
of property,
160 acres,
mycological experiment.
and we have a large
We planted 33,000 trees,
half with mycorrhizal fungi
attached to the roots,
half without,
and this is year nine.
So, we are putting into
an Excel spreadsheet,
or have put in
1,100 trees
to compare the treatments.
I came into a chunk of change
from licensing one
of my patents,
climate of the United States
and so when the political
changed to be adverse
to environmentalists,
we bought land in Canada.
a conventional academic pathway
[Pollan] I think the fact
that he didn't come up on
is part of the reason
he's as willing
to really explore
ideas that...
are not on anyone
else's radar.
[P. Stamets] I'm really honored
that I discovered a few things
had yet discovered.
that no one else
So, I have now five patents
on entomopathogenic fungi.
that infect insects,
These are fungi
and in particular,
termites.
The biggest problem in
the commercialization
of biopesticides
from fungi
repellency property.
has been the spore
The insects avoid the spores
of these fungi.
so concerned are termites
In fact,
and encounters this fungus,
that if a worker goes out
returns back to the nest,
when the worker
capture that worker
guards, they'll
with these spores,
that's infected
take the worker
to a graveyard,
the worker's head,
and they cut off
and then the two guards
commit suicide.
They're trying to protect
the queen and the nest
and the colony
from infection.
And I discovered something
that no one else
had ever reported in the
scientific literature.
I found a biological switch
that delayed sporulation,
and then the insects
were not repelled.
super attracted,
But they were
fungus now, and others follow,
which means one finds the
being a Trojan horse.
and it ends up
The same fungi now are taken
past the guards,
given to the queen, the queen
feeds it to the brood.
mummified with this mycelium,
The whole colony becomes
and, whoosh! The whole colony
is infected and dies.
repellency properties
And then the spore
from subsequent invasions.
protects your house
This is a huge discovery.
And then I tried it
with carpenter ants,
with fire ants,
fungus gnats,
and then mosquitoes,
and now we're working
with bed bugs,
and we've had successes
across the board.
is infused with fungi.
The entire ecosystem
So, I see these deep reservoirs
of the ecology all around us.
In a world of invention,
[narrator]
our greatest problems
the answer to
may be hiding right
under our feet.
[Bone] There are mushrooms
in Western medicine.
that have been used
Penicillin, for example,
is a really effective
antibiotic.
Before it was synthesized,
during the Civil War,
would get wounded,
when a soldier
they would slap a piece of
moldy bread on his wound
antibiotic properties,
to benefit from those
so he wouldn't get
an infection.
[P. Stamets] Alexander Fleming
discovered penicillin in 1927.
The problem was that
they couldn't find strains
commercialized,
that could be
that could produce
enough of it
in a commercially
economic fashion.
We fast forward,
and in 1942,
in Chicago went shopping,
a group of researchers
a cantaloupe that was rotting
and a lab assistant found
with a beautiful
golden mold,
and from that strain,
strain of penicillium.
we got the first
hyper-producing
Penicillin literally saved
of soldiers' lives.
tens of thousands
The Brits had this,
the Japanese did not.
but the Germans and
It's been suggested
that the discovery
of this hyper-producing
strain of penicillin
was a significant influence
in winning World War II.
Alexander Fleming then received
the Nobel Prize in 1945,
of the huge impact
in recognition
that penicillin had
on human health.
mushrooms are thought to work:
[Bone] Here's how medicinal
all kinds of enzymes--
A fungus will produce
a chemical warfare--
it's like
in order to fight off
competition for food,
like other microbes,
bacteria, virus.
other fungi,
That's what makes
antibiotics work.
Chemicals that are
produced by fungus,
penicillin is made from,
like the one that
the fungus produces it
that are competition,
to kill bacteria
and when we take penicillin,
it kills our bacteria.
[Weil] There's a long tradition
of using mushrooms
as medicines in East Asia,
especially in Korea,
China, and Japan.
be able to enhance
They appear to
and protect the body's innate
defensive mechanisms.
The uses for them fill niches
in Western pharmacology.
for which we really
don't have anything
In Western medicine,
all of our effort
is on identifying
agents of disease
and eliminating them.
That has its place,
but we do almost nothing
about supporting the good.
Shamans would treat patients
[P. Stamets]
were thought to be
and the diseases
the spirit world.
elements of
Well, physicians today
treat infections,
and their spirits
are bacteria,
or a pathogenic,
or viruses.
So, whether the shamans
called them spirits
or whether the scientists
call them microbes,
with the invention
of microscopes
we get to see the microscopic
universe and landscape
that we thunder upon
with every footstep.
these fungal networks
The fact that
are seemingly invisible,
but then represent themselves
in a big flourishing mushroom
in a matter of a few days,
the invisible landscape
give us a window into
underneath our feet.
have defended themselves
Fungal networks
against vectors of disease
for millions of years.
occur periodically.
Viral pandemics
Between 1347 and 1353,
European population died
one-third of the
from the black plague.
The great flu pandemic
of 1918,
the world population died.
two percent of
Millions upon millions
of people.
of the threat of bioterrorism,
I think everyone is aware
but few people
may know that
actively involved,
Europeans were
or unconsciously,
consciously
in bioterrorism against
indigenous peoples,
especially in the New World,
in Meso-America.
They brought in diseases,
and when you're extremely sick,
you can't fight off an invader.
of history that now,
It's an irony
the US government
is interested
in protecting people
from viral pandemics.
cultured numerous strains
[reporter] Paul Stamets
in his lab, and prepared
natural extract.
He then submitted samples
BioShield program for testing.
to the Defense Department's
[P. Stamets] And ironically,
I have a debt of gratitude
and George W. Bush.
to Dick Cheney
discuss and address the threat
It is vital that our nation
of pandemic flu now.
Their funding of that research
[P. Stamets]
novel discoveries,
led to some very
to which we're still
elaborating today.
And what we know about these
mycelium networks
is they're learning membranes.
and network-based organisms
They are self-learning
and store knowledge.
that can share
is vaccinating itself
The mycelium
against pathogens
in the ecosystem.
We can capitalize on this
same bacterial pathogens
because many of the
also can infect animals.
that infect fungi,
We have found novel molecules
against pox viruses,
highly active
novel molecules highly active
the human papillomavirus.
against HPV,
Many scientists are
trying to come up
with the next antibiotic,
the next penicillin,
but we have barely tapped
into the fungal genome,
mushroom form of fungi.
especially the
Think of it: our old-growth
forests that contain
these ancient fungi
are deep reservoirs
of potential compounds that
can fight pandemic viruses.
a matter of national defense.
the old-growth forest as
We should save
[Weil] I recommend mushrooms
and mushroom products
frequently to patients
and I teach other doctors
about their uses.
not found elsewhere in nature.
Mushrooms have molecules
totally unusual properties
There're some that have
like Lion's Mane mushroom.
The Lion's Mane mushroom
[P. Stamets]
is a globular cascading
icicle-formed mushroom.
or shrimp when you cook it,
Tastes like lobster
but a researcher in Japan
by the name of Kara-Jishi
discovered in around 1993,
and I don't have the foggiest
idea how you discover this,
this mushroom stimulates
but he discovered that
nerves to regrow
and he postulated it could
be an effective treatment
against Alzheimer's.
[Weil] Since we don't have
anything for Alzheimer's
and since this is nontoxic,
we should test it.
Mushrooms are completely
unusual organisms
and they're ignored
by so many people
a vital interface
and yet they're
between all forms of life.
[P. Stamets] At the University
of Southern Florida,
a very interesting
study came out.
a conditioned fear response
Mice were trained to have
that is associated with a pain,
and so when there's a sound
just heard the sound,
later on when they
they cowered in fear.
When they treated the mice
with psilocybin,
of magic mushrooms,
the compound
the mice dissociated
that link.
fear-conditioned response.
The mice overcame the
We started with very low doses
[Sanchez-Ramos]
one milligram per kilogram.
to as high a dose as
Now what was interesting,
at double-labeled cells,
if you look
the birth of new neurons,
in other words,
we saw an increase
in neurogenesis.
Neurogenesis literally means
"neuro" for nerves
rebirth or beginning of.
and "genesis,"
The regrowing of neurons.
They were not using the same
neurological pathways
they have in the past.
This is really exciting
because it means that the brain
has a plasticity about it,
is able to heal,
is able to grow.
the right compounds
It just needs
to help it develop new
neurological pathways.
We're all getting older.
We'll all suffer some
degree of dementia.
What compounds can we take
preserves neurogenesis?
that enhances and
I know many, many people
a psilocybin mushroom trip,
who would not dare take
but the concept of them taking
one 50th of a dose,
and it causes neurogenesis
something like that,
or in a better mood, or happier?
that might make them smarter,
different subject.
That's a whole
[narrator] We are on
a never-ending search
for partners,
life-affirming relationships,
or at the very least,
next leg of our journey.
nourishment for the
side by side with your species
We have flourished
for centuries.
symbiotically
Many shamanic cultures
[Harman]
relied on mushrooms
for their transcendental
experiences.
This is pre-religion
all over the world.
the individual's connection
It was all about
to the spiritual world,
or the mystery that is
our context for living.
These are ancient artifacts
from the Mayan culture.
These are called
mushroom stones.
the largest collection
This may be
of mushroom stones
in the world.
was very mycophillic
The Mayan culture
and they revered mushroom
stones for divination,
for spirituality.
to predict incoming armies,
Also to be able
and how to strategize
against them.
the name of R. Gordon Wasson
A great ethnomycologist by
came up with the phrase
mycophilia,
that the Mayans shared.
the love of mushrooms
is a classically--
Mycophobia
had a fear of mushrooms
the English
because they're enigmatic.
You know, these mushrooms
can get you high,
they can heal you,
they can feed you,
they can kill you.
And so that which is so powerful
is naturally feared.
[Nicholas Cozzi] Wasson was
an amateur mycologist,
studies mushrooms
a person who
and was invited to participate
in a ceremony by a curandera,
Maria Sabina in 1955.
He took these mushrooms
a psychedelic experience...
and had
[P. Stamets] And when
R. Gordon Wasson came
out with this research
in Life magazine in 1957...
that was published
guide to psilocybin mushrooms
that was basically a field
delivered to tens of
millions of Americans
on their doorstep, during
the peak of the Cold War.
This then was quickly noticed
by academics at Harvard
and other Ivy League schools
and then the cognoscenti,
Ram Dass, and Dr. Andrew Weil.
including Timothy Leary,
produce molecules
Why do mushrooms
the human brain and body?
that fit receptors in
What does that mean?
What does that say?
I mean, does that mean
that we're supposed to
be using these things?
Psychedelics during
the '50s and '60s
of psychiatric research.
were the cutting edge
There were remarkable studies
promising findings.
with very, very
[Ross] Psychedelics became part
of research in psychiatry
for 30 years.
very interesting indications
and there were several
that they were researched.
The best data was actually
for alcoholism.
[Grob] We found that having
a mystical experience
during the course
of one session
was the strongest predictor
of positive outcome,
meaning maintaining sobriety
over the long follow-up period.
It was very impressive.
Some of these drugs,
[Pollan]
they had "escaped the lab,"
as the phrase goes.
Millions of people
were using them
and you have to realize
that this was a radical force
unleashed in the West.
[Timothy Leary] The kids who
going to fight your wars.
take psychedelics aren't
They're not going to join
your corporations,
they won't buy it.
A lot was going on
back in the '60s.
[Bill Richards]
rapid cultural change.
It was a time of
There was irrational fears
cultural change too fast.
about too much
called Timothy Leary
President Nixon
the most dangerous man
in America.
I have called total war
We must wage what
against public enemy number one
in the United States,
with dangerous drugs.
the problem
When everyone says
"shrooms" to me,
it invokes this whole idea
of using psilocybin mushrooms
as a party drug,
They are so much more important
than just getting high.
The movement to marginalize
the major psychedelics
is incredibly complex.
a counterculture movement,
I mean, it plugged into
an anti-establishment movement.
an anti-war movement,
There are many, many forces
that were at play.
Somehow the fuse blew
[Richards]
and one of the victims was
the medical research
with psychedelics.
There was a very irrational
and anti-scientific climate
that was fueled even
in government pamphlets,
distorted information
really had
scientifically accurate.
that was not
It was a bad trip,
instant insanity.
[Ross] The research came
to a halt in 1970.
War was declared on drugs.
The Controlled Substances
Act was passed
essentially was erased
and the research
from being taught
in psychiatry.
I think I may have the dubious
distinction of being the last
[Richards]
to a cancer patient
to give psilocybin
Psychiatric Research Center.
at the Maryland
became completely dormant.
And then the research
In our evolution
as a species,
of coming to terms
we're at a point
with a major paradigm change.
A change in how we view
what we call reality.
And that always evokes
tension and fears.
The culture wants to cling to
the old view of the universe.
been limited all this time
You realize that you've
[P. Stamets]
with your perspective
of reality.
Had reality been known to you
at this level early on,
would we be as beings?
how much more evolved
A lot of people would
be afraid of that.
dangerous territory.
This is very
being able to understand
People want to give up
the responsibility of
then they have faith.
and because they
can't understand,
and they put their faith
in other people who say
they can understand.
And I think it's a situation
a predatory relationship.
that is ripe for
[Bob Jesse] Anyone who's had
one of those experiences
in a country where it's
not legal to have them
is stuck in this position
where something
really precious...
a great gift to you
and really giving
by the culture at large
is not understood
other people or/and other people
and furthermore, puts you or
at risk of prosecution.
And one response to that
is to get angry,
and to want to fight that.
And another response
to it is to say,
to people what's going on here."
"We've just got to explain
And when people understand it,
accommodation and respect.
then there will be
There are a number of elders
living in the Bay Area
who've devoted some part
of their career
or religious studies
in psychology
who ended up being invited
to a small invitational
conference at Esalen
called the Pacific Symposium
on Psychedelic Drugs.
As we went around the room
making introductions,
most of the people
who were clinicians
were excitedly talking about
what kind of clinical
trial they would run
if they could use one
of these substances
to treat PTSD...
or to treat depression.
the best design we could.
[Richards] We wrote
We submitted it to the FDA
and they approved it.
This was 1999,
psychedelic research
and it reactivated
dormancy in the United States.
after basically a 22-year
a Rip Van Winkle effect.
It's like
it's waking up 20 years later.
You know,
The methodologies,
the questions that we can ask
on so many different levels.
[Tony Head] I had been diagnosed
with prostate cancer.
My diagnosis was so bad
that...
You know, they weren't giving me
any chance whatsoever.
[Judith Goedeke] My diagnosis
was kidney cancer.
Finding out that you may want
to get your affairs in order.
[Head] I first found out
about the study
when my oncologist
gave me a pamphlet.
He said, "Here's something
that might be able to help
you with the anxiety."
And I was accepted
into the study.
The most important thing
that you're always safe.
is to remember
that whatever is coming up,
And a recommendation is
that you allow it,
that you don't have to like it,
but you say okay,
to run away from it.
rather than trying
enrolled in the study,
Once a volunteer is
they're with us
for the preparation,
the psilocybin sessions
and the integration
follow-ups after.
around 350 psilocybin sessions
I have been a guide for
and then about a thousand
and integration meetings.
of the preparatory
Alright.
Okay, lift your head up.
experiencing what comes up
It's really just about
as the psilocybin takes effect.
[Head] In the intense part
of this journey,
that matter to most people,
this world and things
family and all that,
what it was about.
that wasn't even
They say anything mystical
can't be explained.
It's something like that.
of such immense power
It's a feeling
that you can't even imagine.
anything like it before.
I've never felt
It was about being in a place
of infinite space
and just being there.
experience of positive mood,
[Griffiths] There's a
openheartedness, love,
sometimes
of time and space,
a transcendence
thought to be ineffable.
and then finally, it's
People say, "I can't describe
that experience."
[Goedeke] In my mind I said,
"Okay, hold it.
If I give myself over to you...
can you promise me
that I will be in at least
as strong a shape
as when I entered this room?"
that I needed to heed.
And I felt a voice
disrespect my own handiwork?"
"Do you think I would
from on high saying,
This is the voice
"Do you think I would
disrespect my child?"
And I felt so beautiful.
I felt like I have
never felt before.
My sense of being loved,
of being worthy of love,
of being cared for,
of being important
to someone.
It's huge.
you're doing beautifully.
You're going into it,
of individuals in the study
[Griffiths] One-third
said it's the single most
experience of their lives.
spiritually significant
About 70% say
most personally meaningful
experiences of their lives.
it's among the five
"Well, so what does that mean?"
Then you say,
And initially I thought,
You know?
I wonder if they don't have
pretty dull lives.
people would say,
But no,
you know, when my firstborn
came into this world,
I'll never forget that.
been the same since.
And life has never
That was deeply moving to me.
Or my father passed away.
I'm different now
in the world.
it's kind of like that.
They say, you know,
glorious part was that
[Head] The most
comfortable with living,
it made me feel more
because, uh...
you know,
you're not afraid of dying.
I'm just a laboratory scientist
[Griffiths] Frankly,
and I wasn't prepared for that.
[Richards] From the memory
of the transcendental state
of consciousness,
many people report less anxiety,
less depression,
less preoccupation
with pain,
closer interpersonal
relationships,
and perhaps most impressive,
they claim to have a loss
of the fear of death.
how they see death.
It recalibrates
It's been amazing hearing them
talk about this idea of love.
[Anthony Bossis]
Many of them spoke about
how nature itself
is something like
this substance called love.
And having touched that,
and reshaped how they
They've recalibrated
die differently.
[Jesse] The Johns Hopkins
psilocybin research team
has completed or has underway
a total of nine studies
world's attention.
and it got the
When we finally released the
results of our first experiment
in a peer-reviewed
scientific journal,
it was very gratifying to see
how the daily press
responded to it.
A little bit of health news
for you.
A single dose of psychedelic
magic mushrooms
can make people with severe
anxiety and depression
feel better for months.
[Richards] It changes the
way they view themselves,
other people in the world...
from a single experience,
to keep taking day after day.
not Prozac that you have
These are not chronic drugs,
[Pollan]
and that's where most
of the research
in Big Pharma goes.
and development
being explored for psilocybin
The treatments that are
involve one, two, maybe
three pills. That's it.
That's not a very good
business model.
a lot of money that way.
You can't make
The core of this mystical
experience is, um...
is a mystery, frankly.
It's the existential mystery
of what are we really
doing here?
What's the meaning
of all this?
and that is a very uplifting
kind of experience to have.
[Richards] As a whole,
there's a sense of being part
of a larger network.
And somehow, that's more real
after a mystical experience.
really are connected
You feel that you
in some meaningful way
of the universe.
with every atom
From my perspective,
[Griffiths]
this core experience informs
ethical and moral traditions.
all of the religious,
"Love thy neighbor as thyself."
I mean, that is the core of
of these priorities straight
If we don't get some
we treat other people,
with respect to how
how we treat our environment,
cease to exist.
we're gonna
as being critical
I could see this
of the species, frankly.
to the evolution
[P. Stamets] You wouldn't go
hiking the Himalaya mountains
without any preparation.
Well, this is a journey.
These are sacraments
and medicines
that should be treated
with respect
and caution.
to your own personal church.
Consider it to be going
in awe of the universe.
You're going to sit
[Bossis] We have a new study,
which is kind of remarkable.
religious leaders.
It's work with
These are ordained clergy
who have many traditions.
Christianity, Buddhism,
Judaism, Hinduism.
Since these experiences
are at the core
of the major religions,
why not bring in
religious leaders
who spent their careers
studying this landscape
to have the experience?
-[Stamets] You guys hear that?
-[phone vibrating]
-[man] Vibrating?
-You didn't?
Phone call was coming in.
Vibrating.
There she goes.
Message from Mom.
Inbound message
from Mother.
[P. Stamets]  I think I had
the best of all mothers.
My mother was extremely kind.
[cheering and applause]
empowers the immune system
So another mushroom
and this is turkey tails.
and turkey tail mushrooms
have also been used
for more than a thousand years.
personally, in June of 2009
This hit home to me very
when my 84-year-old mother
called me up
and said, "Paul,
I have something very serious
to talk to you about."
five times the size of my left.
She said, "My right breast is
I have six swollen lymph glands
the size of walnuts,"
and her voice started shaking
and I'm not ashamed to admit
that I started crying.
She had stage four
breast cancer.
But then the doctor said,
"You know,
have radiation therapy.
you're too old to
You can't have your
breasts removed.
But there's an interesting study
on turkey tail mushrooms
at Bastyr Medical School.
to try taking those."
You might want
And that's-- my mom goes,
supplying those."
"Well, my son's
and Herceptin, wonderful drugs.
So she was put on Taxol
And then she started taking
eight turkey tail
capsules a day.
and four in the evening,
Four in the morning
and that was in June of 2009.
has no detectable tumors.
And today, my mother
to bring my mother up.
And I'd like
You have to live through
it to believe it.
Hey, by the way, thank you
for giving birth to me.
I really appreciate that.
thanked me lately?
Oh, you haven't
reported in literature that
[P. Stamets] It has been
medicinal mushrooms
like turkey tail
help chemotherapeutic
agents work better.
a living example of that.
And I think she's
One can argue with me
on the statistics,
but my mother's alive,
and all the doctors
that saw her
that she would survive.
did not believe
[man] It is my great honor...
to introduce Paul Stamets.
[cheering and applause]
a fungal friend of mine
I have brought
from the old-growth forest
and I present to you...
Agarikon.
[cheering and applause]
Agarikon was described
in 65 A.D.
as elixirium ad longam vitam.
"The elixir of long life."
So I want to take you
on a magical mushroom
mystery tour.
the envelope here, folks.
and I'm going to push
is biodiversity.
Microdiversity
I'm going to decompose.
You will decompose.
We're all gonna die.
That's okay,
because we will enter
into the micro-verse.
We will forever exist together
micromolecular matrix.
within the
[Lincoff] When he talks
the way he does,
he is...
channeling the mycelium.
And this is a marvelous thing.
Brain neurons,
mycelium,
the computer internet,
the organization of the universe
all shares the same archetype.
I believe matter
begets life.
Life becomes single cells.
Single cells form chains.
Chains forms branches.
intersecting mosaics of mycelium
Matrices form interlocking,
organisms ebb and flow
and mycelium-like
not only on this planet,
on other planets
into the future.
Thank you very much.
in bringing us information
Paul was wonderful
about all these
aspects of mushrooms
all these young people.
and then it inspired
Now we have people
like Tradd Cotter
carrying on the great work
that Paul started,
talking about biopesticides,
talking about the ways
you could detoxify oil.
All of these amazing
things were started
because people like Paul
the culture at large
brought that to
have taken up the cause
and young people now
and are really expanding
our insights
of mushrooms can do for us.
into what the world
Hi, my name's Peter
and I'm with the radical
mycology project.
I recently trained a mushroom
to digest used
cigarette filters.
[Peter McCoy] Paul Stamets's
book, Mycelium Running
got my mind sort of in a whirl.
first discovered that
That was when I
there was much more to
mushrooms than just food.
[Brown] If you would've seen me
when I dropped out
of high school,
I was just making rap music.
about the natural world.
I knew very little
I had never even went
on a hike until I was 18,
but finding Paul Stamets'
TED talk video
inspirations that pushed me
was one of the biggest
into the wonderful world
of mycology.
My first mushroom book
was The Mushroom Cultivator
by Paul Stamets.
[Furci] I will be eternally
thankful to him
for showing me that it's okay
to be mushroom mad.
[Lori Cariss] We really don't
even know most fungi.
We're discovering new species
on a daily basis
and you don't have to go
to exotic locations
to discover them.
[McCoy] Anybody can
add to the science,
from identifying a new species
micro-mediation protocol.
to developing a new
[Cariss] There is a great need
for more people to study fungi
and there's lots
of opportunities.
we don't know about mushrooms.
[Pollan] It's amazing what
They really are a frontier
of knowledge.
solve all sorts of problems
They probably can help us
if we look a little deeper.
[Cotter] Anyone, anyone can help
by going and walking
in the woods
and contributing
to mycology.
You may have found a species
that has never been found.
We need these mushrooms.
We work together as a community
to solve problems.
We could be the community
that heals the planet.
[P. Stamets] It's been estimated
two-thirds of our food supply
is bee-pollinated-dependent.
Unfortunately, we're losing
bees across the world
that is very dangerous
in a dramatic die-off
for the biosecurity
of this planet.
So I started exploring ways
to help save the bees
in the summertime
and I noticed
there's a continuous
convoy of bees
going from my beehives
to my mycelium.
But then it dawned on me,
maybe the bees are benefiting
from the mycelial extracts
antiviral properties.
because they have
And so I cultured the most
aggressive strains
and then submitted them.
effects of these extracts
We started testing the
in helping bees survive.
[Nicholas Naeger] Some of these
fungal extracts are really good
levels in the bee.
at reducing viral
So here we have a fungus
that is helping fight
viruses in an insect.
mushrooms to create
[man] We're using
an entirely new class
of materials
which are totally compostable
at the end of their lives.
The researchers found that
[woman]
a portobello mushroom skin
when they heated
degrees Fahrenheit,
to roughly 2,000
of carbon nano ribbon
it became a lattice
that could be used
in battery design
because it allows a good
amount of surface area
for storing energy.
You can filter water.
[Cotter]
compounds almost on demand.
You can create medicinal
We've worked in Haiti,
like I have super powers.
and they look at you
Well, I tell them, I said,
have superpowers too."
"You are about to
the background of not
[Brown] Coming from
having any training,
lab was very empowering.
getting myself into the
I felt like I could do anything.
I felt like a superhero.
You're officially
a mushroom farmer.
Sporulating.
Sporgasm.
[Lincoff] I see my species
as part of a larger whole.
the top of the pyramid,
Rather than being at
being one of the organisms
with inside the circle.
made up of mycelium,
and the circle is
holding us all together.
[Simard] We've always thought of
plants as these inert objects,
each other and build things,
these things that don't
actually interact with
is showing, and other
people's work as well,
and what my work
it's saying actually,
they need each other.
to grow in a community
They need each other
so that they can start
sharing the load.
You do this, I'll do that,
and together,
we can make a beautiful
resilient community.
They have incredible capacity
to make things change
very, very quickly.
So if we can work with them,
if we get it, you know?
If humans get it,
we can change this
thing really fast.
So I am super hopeful.
and help nature do its thing.
We just got to get busy
Evolution never stops.
There's not one point
that it happens
doesn't happen again.
and then it
It's continuously happening.
The core concept of evolution
natural selection,
is that through
and the fittest survive.
the strongest
But moreover,
communities survive better
than individuals.
Communities rely
upon cooperation,
the power of goodness.
and I think that's
Evolution is based
of mutual benefit,
on the concept
and the extension
of generosity.
[Simard] When we see it,
we understand it.
And when we understand it,
we care about it.
And when we care about it,
we'll do something
to help save it.
We need to have a paradigm shift
in our consciousness.
What will it take
to achieve that?
We are not an individual.
We are a vast network
energies and wavelengths.
of molecules and
The interconnectedness of
being is who we are.
[narrator] This world of
ours is always changing,
not for the better
or for the worse,
but for life.
and the water rises,
If the storms come
if fire scorches the land,
or darkness descends,
we will be here
working,
as we always have.
Extending the network.
Building community.
Restoring balance.
One connection at a time.
It may take a million years,
or a hundred million,
but we will still be here.
Lieutenant Paul Stamets.
[computer]
I became an astral mycologist
because of awe.
Awe at the miracle of life.
[TV host] How did you feel
character on Star Trek
seeing a fictional
that is inspired
by your science?
I'm super honored.
I tuned into Star Trek when
I was about 12 years old.
Spores by their nature
travel through the cosmos.
When they germinate,
some mushrooms form.
Some magic mushrooms help you
bend time and space.
[laughter]
if I were to visit you...
[TV host] So, uh,
of these magic mushrooms?
could we have some
Nature provides. I don't.
[P. Stamets]
[laughter]